UNIX Shell, C++, and Python
===========================

UNIX Shell
----------

The `UNIX shell <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_shell>`_ is going
to become your best friend. You should really learn how to use it
effectively. The default shell on most Linux distributions is ``bash``
(the latest version of macOS uses ``zsh``, which is very similar to
bash, feel free to poke around the internet to read about how they're
different). Check out `this tutorial
<https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/>`_. There are also many
videos online to walk you through a lot of basics; `this one
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oxuRxtrO2Ag>`_ is pretty thorough.

Operating in a shell is an incredibly powerful way to use a
computer. At least 95% of all HEP tasks are tackled via some kind of
command line interface that requires using a UNIX shell.

C++ and Python
--------------

The main programming languages used in HEP are C++ and Python. There
are *infinite* resources online for learning these programming
languages, and countless books, so there is not point documenting the
programming languages here. The best way to learn is just to dive in
and solve the problem you need to solve. Google is your friend. There
are a number of people in the Duke ATLAS group who can probably answer
most simple C++ and Python questions. Freel free to drop a question on
`Mattermost
<https://mattermost.web.cern.ch/duke/channels/summer-students-2019>`_.

For a good introduction to programming in C++ (put together by a high
energy physicist), see `these slides
<http://webhome.phy.duke.edu/~ddavis/public/Summer2016_CPPTutorial.pdf>`_. Another
great resource is the `cppreference.com
<https://en.cppreference.com/w/>`_ website. This is exactly what it
claims to be: a reference. You won't find any tutorials here; but you
will find all of the features of the language and its standard
library.

For a quick introduction to Python, see this `Learn Python in 10
minutes <https://www.stavros.io/tutorials/python/>`_ article.
